So good morning. Good morning. Good morning, Malith. This is Paminda and Robin interviewing
Malith at her home in Swansea. And this is the Tuesday the 16th of July 11.15am. Thank
you very much, Malith. And really this is a story about you. So let me launch into a
first question. Your early memories of Kampala and Uganda? Well, I didn't know any different.
We lived in a little suburb of Kalolo, which is a beautiful area and beautiful houses,
not as tall as this house, but lovely houses and bungalow with a beautiful front garden,
with a pomegranate tree. As you stood in the house, you looked right. There was a pomegranate
tree on the right. So very happy memories, actually. I was born in 61, after a very,
very long wait. Mum and Dad had been married for about 20 odd years, so it was a really
lovely welcome surprise. And I was told that, because I didn't know where babies came from,
because we didn't talk about things like that. So I was saying, how did I come to be here
to my mum? So I was defrosted from a hospital freezer. So I was really, you know, and I
said, why did you pick me? Well, I was the prettiest one there. So, you know, that's
how it all happened. And of course, that was perfectly fine by me. And yeah, beautiful
in a lovely home in Kallolo on Bukota Street and pomegranate tree on the right, lovely
garden. And then we used to grow pineapple. My sister and I would grow pineapple, but
of course we kept digging it up to see how it's grown. So we used to disturb them too
much. And then on the back there was papaya tree growing, which didn't always give us
a lot of fruit, but the pomegranate was really abundant. And we also had a beautiful scented,
fragrant frangipani tree called Champa. It's a Champa family. And when the flowers used
to fall, my sister and I used to trample on them, but they'd always bounce back up. So
it was like they were very forgiving, I used to say. The flowers are very forgiving, but
the scent was absolutely gorgeous. And the market, which was superb, was just down the
road really on Bukota Street, out of the house left, and you were in the beautiful market.
And my sister and I used to go down with my mum, and we used to, if we were lucky, we
would be given, treated to a sugar cane juice. So there was a man with a mangle, and the
juice would drop into a bucket, and we would have that while mum did her shopping, and
everybody carried a bit back. I was the eldest with my sister and myself, so I carried more.
But the African women would come to sell their green beans and what have you, and their wares,
or the makai, which is the corn, all with the head and everything on, which is wonderful
really, and a lot of sound noise, and then we'd have a good time, go along the little
market street, and then come back home with them, having had our treat. And sometimes
we used to get lucky, and there would be a candy floss machine, which was amazing to
see candy floss being made. You know, this is sort of 60s, 70s, so it was really exciting
to see a candy floss machine. We didn't have a lot of toys, but we had a very happy childhood,
as we thought, and on the back of the house was a big yard really, so we were very naughty,
and it was a flat roof, so we lived in an extended family, which is quite normal because
my father and my mother, that marriage was a second marriage for both of them, because
both their partners had died. And what had happened was my dad got widowed, his first
wife died in a fire, and the boys that they had were only one and a half and two and a
half years old, so in those days it was okay to remarry under those circumstances, and
my dad was making a lot of money, he was one of the wealthiest men in Uganda, he was listed,
and so he went to India to find a bride to Gujarat, and he went to Rawal, because my
dad originally was from Singara, but the farm would always fail, there wasn't enough crops,
and their father, their parents said, you've just got to try and get out of here, you know,
you can't survive like this, so the four brothers, my father was the second of the four brothers,
they all went to Uganda and tried to make a success of their lives, and my dad was one
of the most successful people, but without a wife and two small children, there was an
accident with a fire, that's how she died, because in those days you'd have, you didn't
have like an iron that plugged in into electrics, you had a coal iron, and also there was open
fuel there, with open source of liquid fuel, and of course we had staff, which sounds terrible,
but we had a lot of Africans working for us, like my sister and I also had a maid, and
that was all quite normal, because we employed people, and when Mrs Rupert really had the
first caught fire, she was wearing her sari, but instead of what she should have done was
took her sari off as it caught fire, but you wouldn't undress in front of the staff, African
male staff, or even female staff, so what she did was she ran to the outside loo to
try and get the water from the loo, but there wasn't enough water in there, and as a result
she burned to death, so it was a dreadful tragedy, so my father was left with two small
boys, one and a half and two and a half year old, and so he went to India to find a bride,
which was again quite normal in those days, and he heard about a woman whose husband had
also died, and my mother's first husband, I asked her, she was married at something
like fifteen, because in those days, that's girls, as soon as they reach puberty, you
had to get them quickly married and settled, and I said to my mother, what happened to
your first husband, because I was, I think even as a small child I was probably a little
researcher growing, so I was always asking questions, and I was just relentless, and
I think she didn't know quite how to deal with me, so in the end she would answer me,
she was very reluctant to talk about negative things, because I think obviously looking
back as an adult now, it must have brought up terrible memories for her, so I said, what
happened to your husband, and she used to say, oh he was a lovely man, we were only
married nine months, and she used to say, you know where the wee wee comes from, because
we didn't know anatomical words, and you know where a man does his wee wee, well instead
of wee wee there would be a lot of blood coming out, so I worked out, it was, and she said
it was a cancer, so I worked out it might have been a bladder cancer or something like
that, anyway within nine months of being married, he was gone, and of course she now as a widow
living with her siblings, she had two brothers and about four sisters or so, she was, it
was going to be difficult to marry her off, because once you've been married the once,
nobody wants you again, because your clastor is like second hand goods if you like, and
so when my dad went to India and heard about this woman who'd lost her husband, he went
and put a proposal forward that I will marry her, I've got two small boys, one and a half,
two and a half, and my mother had the proposal through her parents, my mother had never met
my dad, and my mother said no, I am not going to, because she'd never been out of the village,
so she was very frightened, I mean she's only a fifteen year old who's lost her husband,
and she said no I'm not going to Africa, you know I'm too scared, I want to stay with
you, obviously mum and dad, and the village, she'd never been outside of Rawal, and money
was tight, and she was another mouth to feed, so she just refused, but they had to sit her
down and say to her look we've got all your other sisters and we've got two brothers here,
and basically you're another mouth to feed and nobody else is going to actually marry
you because you've been widowed now, and widowhood in India is well seen as, it's almost like
the woman is blamed for it, like bad karma, unfortunately, and there's a huge stigma about
losing your husband, and as you know in the years before there was the Sati, which is
where the widow actually burnt herself as well while the husband was on fire, being
cremated, and that had to be stopped then, and that practice even carries on in rural
India now, so they had to sit my mother down, the parents, and said basically be honest
with her and say to her you're another mouth to feed and we actually are struggling here,
and my mother was persuaded to marry my dad, and the only time, the first time she saw
him was on her wedding day, and she went to raise the garland of flowers up round her
neck and she looked at him and she was really horrified because he had spotty skin, and
I've inherited that, so it was a bit like oh my god mum and dad what have you done to
me, you know, but she couldn't say anything and she was married, and off she went on a
long journey to East Africa having never left the village her entire life, and the fact
that the other clinch point was the fact that my dad said I don't want any dowry either,
so that was a big bonus because you had to give a dowry if you wanted to marry your daughter
off, and sometimes in these days often the groom will ask for a car or even a house or
whatever before I'll marry your daughter, anyway dad was self-made and he said I don't
want anything, I don't need anything, I just want somebody, my wife, to bring up my two
boys and be a wife. Mum and dad went and they married in Kenya and then they settled in
Uganda, and he was under a lot of pressure with his work but mum brought up the two boys
as her own, and she always thought of them as her own boys, and so it was an incredible
surprise some twenty years on in her forties she managed to get pregnant, because she always
believed in God, very religious spiritual woman and the guru that she followed had
said to her to start fasting on a Thursday, that was his special day for fasting, and
I used to go to a lot of the prayers with her as I grew up and she always used to say
this is the guru who made you happen, and she always credited him with that, and I used
to go to all the temples with her and the bhajans singing and I used to sing as well
bhajans and hymns as equivalent to, and then two years after that my little brother was
born but he was still born and meanwhile my older brother, older brother, two brothers
we called him suru, he had children as well and the son that they had Jethan was literally
nine months difference or so between me and him because I came very late, so I was his
auntie but I was only literally months older than him, and then when my mum got pregnant
again, two years later with a son, which would have been an incredible achievement,
especially as boys are more revered than girls, my younger brother was also getting married
his name was Ratilal and my mother sort of said that I'm struggling with the pregnancy
in my forties and I've got this pregnancy again and asked if he would delay him from
his wedding so that the baby would be born and they refused to delay the wedding, he
refused to delay the wedding, he didn't want to wait and as a result when the baby was
born, the child, he was perfect, my mother would cry about it, he was perfect but he
was still born because obviously Indian weddings, the attitude was oh well don't do it, don't
do anything and just sit down but as the mother of the groom you couldn't just sit down and
you've got hundreds and hundreds of relatives coming from all over and there's lots of food,
lots of preparations, prayers, different ceremonies to the wedding, it's not like just a registered
wedding like it is in often cases and she lost the baby and I did say to her mum could
you not have said delay the big wedding and she said I did try but they didn't want
to wait, he didn't want to wait so she always said he was perfect, your little brother,
perfectly born and her lips would turn downwards but she would find it very difficult to cry
as I do actually, I don't show my emotions that easily so then two years after that she
was pregnant again and my little sister was born, another baby then was found in the hospital
freezer defrosted and brought home and she also was brought home because she was the
prettiest one in the freezer so of course it was all very magical and it was only later
I realised the consequence of losing the brother because obviously the male would have been
an amazing asset to have with us and he would have had status whereas girls don't have
the status and everything seemed to be fine, we lived with my older brother Suru and he
had four children, three boys and a girl, we grew up together and then when I was aged
eight basically my partnership with grief began because my dad had a sudden heart attack
and I was at school and one of my cousins Ramneek came to fetch me and wouldn't tell
me what's wrong so I was saying what is wrong, what is wrong and he just wouldn't say what
was wrong, I knew something was wrong but I was just insistent but he wouldn't say and
he just let me find out so once we got to the house, we got back to the house there
was loads of shoes outside and I knew something terrible had happened and my dad had come
home, this was 1969 and one of the staff, I think it was Francisco, the male staff,
we had the African Ugandan guy had helped him up the steps and into bed and I could
see my dad jolting up and shaking and then my mum would push him down again to lie down
and he jolts up and shake and I didn't realise but that was a heart attack he was having
and there wasn't a lot of medicine in those days, you didn't know what had caused it and
he died and Chetan who was my brother's oldest son and I understood but the youngsters didn't
understand as much so we were just screaming and crying because we were really close to
dad and that was his grandad, my dad and so we were locked in the bathroom because we
were making such a racket and then we were taken out and then we were sent off to one
of my uncle's houses, just tears and snot all running down, not understanding but knew
that this was terrible catastrophe and then eventually we were, when all the ceremonies
had finished, the funeral ceremonies and the bhajans and the goodbyes and we were taken
back to Kalolo and there then in the lino somebody, one of the ladies said when there
were people sitting all, my dad was on the bed and people were sitting all across the
floor cross legged and all the way and there was hundreds of shoes there because you don't
take shoes into somebody's house especially at a time like that because obviously the
gods and goddesses are coming to collect the departed one and somebody said oh you know
I can see the gods here and somebody actually could see in the lino a shape of one of the
gods and everybody then could see it so we all had to clear this area because then it
was quite evident that the gods had come to collect my dad so it was seen as a blessing
and then that area was decorated with the red, the kanku, the blessed mark and even
I could see the skirt and I realize now later on as a researcher when one person sees it,
other people do see it but I didn't know that at the time but it seemed to give my
mum a lot of comfort and then I realized dad was taken away but only the men go to the
crematorium, the women aren't allowed because we're too delicate and it's not the done
thing and the first born son would light the funeral pyre and so dad was taken away and
then as dad was taken away mum was surrounded by lots of women, all the women were left
behind and mum wanted me with her, somebody else was looking after my little sister and
then we went back into the house and my mum was crying and saying I may as well be dead
myself and I may as well just kill myself now, I've got nothing now and all the women
and this was in front of me as well and I said to mum you've got me mum, you've got
us mum and then when we went back up into the backyard then I noticed one of the women's
arms reached out and wiped away my mum's red dot on her forehead to signify her wedding,
her marriage, you know a sign of pride and then somebody took off all her colourful bangles
and got a stone and smashed them up because from now on mum wouldn't be allowed to wear
colourful clothes so I saw a big transition in her clothes and any of her jewellery and
so she could wear a plain gold bangle and very plain things but she wouldn't be allowed
to have decorations so she always had to dress in white now and that would signify her status
as a widow and it started our partnership with grief basically so that was the end of
the security we'd known because we'd had four bed roomed house and a big lounge in
the middle and then corridors in the front and the back so it was quite a nice big house
and my side of the family, my mum and dad and my sister and I, we slept on the one side
and my step brother, his wife and four kids were on the other side and it was fine for
a few weeks and then as often happens in the case of widowhood because the father's gone
and you've lost your status, my brother then, Suru, had never really worked and my dad couldn't
get him to work. He liked running the casino, my dad had a casino as well as the business
and he had a taxi rank as well so he was happy with the casino side of it, gambling machine
but he wasn't really into working with my dad's shops and things on South Street in
Kampala and within a few months he then just left and we didn't even see them go because
we'd have been really upset, my sister and I and my mother if we'd seen them go but
it was all obviously packed, everything was packed, arranged and we woke up one day to
start our play programme as you know you always have to play or run or catch tiggy or share
the bicycle out and like Chetan and I would ride the bicycle and we'd have these games
where if it's a Bollywood song, if it's a woman singing I got a chance to go on the
bicycle but if it's a man singing he had a chance but then if there was three or four
women singing in a row he would cry so then you know we had to make another rule well
if it's a man and a woman singing you can have a go then but the youngsters couldn't
get on the bicycle so we'd take them round the yard, our backyard with us, one of us
holding and the other one guiding the cycle well all that went, everything was just gone
and we woke up one day and then gone and there were no way to be seen and my brother and
my sister-in-law Sila did come back and take us to the cinemas because we always used
to go to open air audience on the weekend but they would never, you know they never
lived there again basically so they were using dad's money basically to rent in town in
Kampala so but they did still come back to take us to the cinema and it was Bollywood
movies, open air so it was all singing, dancing, happy, always a happy ending and somehow all
the difficulties are overcome and love always triumphs somehow between a man and a woman
but it also became quite evident that women once you've lost your dad and you've not
got a brother who cares for you because the other brother Ratila who had a business sugar
factory in Lugazi and dad had always insisted on education, he was very pro-education and
he had sent my younger of the two brothers Ratila to Germany and India and he'd done
his engineering degree and he'd travelled and then he'd set up this sugar factory and
my dad obviously helped him with all that but he lived in Lugazi so he was never really
close by anywhere apart from family occasions when he'd come and you know it was all,
he was still obviously very much part of the family and what does happen with once you've
lost your dad and your husband is as a woman and especially with brothers who are not interested
in taking care of you or looking after you is you are open to abuse and assault and it's
I'm sorry to say this but it's quite a common thing in the culture so we were extremely
vulnerable but they also, when my step-brother left, said to me, I'm going to go to the
school, my step-brother left, he also took away Francisco, our most trusted male staff
we'd had from when we were small. So now if we wanted somebody, mum had to appoint this
other staff but he was always drinking and drunk and he would always try and grab us
and so as soon as it got dusky we'd have to lock the doors, we couldn't play in the yard
anymore and he used to keep banging on the kitchen which was at the back and we would
be curious as two little girls seeing why is he banging, what's happening and we'd
open the wooden shutters and every window had bars on it so for security, metal bars
and he'd be like trying to put his hand through the metal bars to try and grab us and there
was also assaults from the family as well, the extended families but that was, I didn't
realise at the time, I just couldn't believe people were treating me differently and eyeing
me up differently because I was the older of the two and I was beginning to, I was about
you know 11, 10, 11 so I was beginning to turn really and it wasn't even safe to go
and visit the relatives because you could be isolated and assaulted and unfortunately
that was common then as it turned out and I didn't have any awareness of any of that
and then it was frightening but then we had one of the cousins who, my dad had insisted
because the other part, one part of the family actually worked with dad and a lot of the
cousins worked with dad in the shop, he had a trade shop and all sorts of goods he used
to sell in his business and this part of the family, also actually the sons, the cousins
worked with dad because obviously my stepbrother, Suru, you could never get him to do any work,
he just liked the casino work and running around basically and one of the sons, my dad
had always said, oh you know because his brother had died so he wanted to make sure he looked
after all the sons and I never met my uncle, Kalyanji, but his sons were, always worked
in the shop with dad and one of the sons, he said I'm going to make sure I pay for
his education and I'm going to make sure, because Ratilal, my own stepbrother, went
to India and Germany and he said I'm going to make sure I help him with his education
so we've got a doctor in the family so he paid for all his medical training and supported
him to get his medical degree in India and he came back qualified as a doctor but we
were safe then or so we thought and then the other frightening incident that happened
was the military were doing rounds when Idi Amin came up, came into power saying the Asians
are leeching the country and they don't care about you and all this business and the
military were coming round and you'd have a warning to say they're coming so you had
to make sure, they come with guns, it's not like the military in this country and you'd
have to make sure you had wads of money ready to hand over and once they're banged on the
door you had to open the door and the military were doing rounds and the military was doing
the rounds and Mrs Manick had said to mum just lock your door and stay indoors and can
you get one of your cousins, one of the boys from the extended family to come and spend
the night with you because we knew that night the military were coming. We were absolutely
petrified and you know don't open the door she said to my mum because she was afraid
I was scared as well because mum could be quite feisty as well, not educated but she
stood her ground, she was quite strong lady in many ways which I didn't appreciate at
the time when I've seen other widows just being kicked about, I didn't realise how strong
mum had been and what it must have took. She'd also been suicidal as well and after dad died
she was so alone and deserted by the family, by all the extended family that one day she
said, I was only a child, I was only something like nine and she said I'm going to kill
myself and we were just at the back area near the kitchen and she started to put, she put,
she stuck her dress, you know her sari with a match and so I cried and cried and I tried,
you know I didn't know what to do so I'd be like flapping at the flames and she kept
saying that and then she'd come to her mind, she was so depressed and she'd put the fire
out and she'd dab herself down and she burned quite a few of her saris by doing that, the
corners of her saris, her pala and my sister had also witnessed this so she then one day
had also been playing with matches in the back bathroom and she was only between four
and five and then she came out screaming, we were at the back, it was daylight and my
sister came out of the bathroom screaming and crying and I looked at her and the flames
were on the dress and there was a sink there and my mother was scooping up water from the
sink and throwing it at my sister but it wasn't working, the flames were burning her white
dress and I just didn't know what to do, I mean it was only nine and not seen a fire,
didn't know what to do and so my mum just said go and ask next door neighbour what to
do so I ran to the man next door and he was in the back yard and I said what do I do,
what do I do, my sister's on fire, throwing water at her isn't working and my mum was
panicking, I was in a total panic and he said oh lay her down on the ground with the blanket,
wrap it over and just lay her down so I ran back in and I was just screaming get a blanket,
get a blanket, get a blanket so mum went and got a blanket and I grabbed it and I rolled
her in it and laid her down to put the flames out and then I was just crying and screaming
at my mum then in return and I said, I didn't know how to express myself very well but I
remember saying to her you taught her how to do this, watching you, you taught her,
and after that mum never threatened suicide again and I was crying and I said to mum you
know don't you love us but she never did that again.